Caption: hello everyone and welcome to another
Caption: amazing DDD Perth talk I'm very excited
Caption: to introduce our next speaker so that is
Caption: Gisele Rowe she is an I.T professional
Caption: who's been in Consulting since the
Caption: mid-1980s and during this time she's
Caption: taken on many it roles including
Caption: business analyst system analyst
Caption: programmer strategist program manager
Caption: and it manager
Caption: she's also been a practice manager
Caption: delivery manager and a regional manager
Caption: for Consulting organizations and she
Caption: currently heads up the strategy and
Caption: design team at Insight here in Perth so
Caption: please welcome her to the stage to talk
Caption: about project insanity
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: hi so I'm Gisele thank you for choosing
Caption: to come to my presentation and for all
Caption: of my insight teammates supporting me
Caption: thank you very much I really appreciate
Caption: it
Caption: have you ever walked into a project and
Caption: got that sense of deja vu where all the
Caption: problems you've seen before many many
Caption: times before
Caption: we'll picture this you're a project
Caption: manager been asked to go into a new
Caption: project
Caption: you know the CIO because you've worked
Caption: with him in a different organization
Caption: before but you've never worked for this
Caption: particular organization so you're a bit
Caption: Green in this world
Caption: so in order to help set the scene I've
Caption: invited one of my teammates Trent Kane
Caption: to play the role of the CIO
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: um hi Giselle how you going I'm great
Caption: thanks Trent team we've got my computer
Caption: set up I've got my credentials it's all
Caption: going well I was about to start doing
Caption: some digging for some background
Caption: information could you point me to where
Caption: the business case is please
Caption: um we didn't need to do a business case
Caption: for this project it's uh being driven by
Caption: a need to replace some Legacy software
Caption: so we've got some Legacy replacement
Caption: funds set aside
Caption: okay
Caption: um so do we at least have
Caption: um a budget for it that I need to work
Caption: towards
Caption: um only your budget uh we've got a
Caption: in-house team that'll do everything else
Caption: you need
Caption: oh well it's good to know that there's a
Caption: team
Caption: um are they aware the Project's coming
Caption: and have they already been allocated not
Caption: specifically but they're a really good
Caption: team of uh Business and Technology
Caption: people they'll be able to help you out
Caption: with whatever you need just get in touch
Caption: with their team leads when you need them
Caption: um okay cool now I recall when we spoke
Caption: previously you said you wanted this to
Caption: be an agile project so the IT team and
Caption: the business familiar with agile not
Caption: exactly but that's why we have you
Caption: right
Caption: so have we at least got a product owner
Caption: yeah I've got great news we've got a
Caption: product owner called Robert he's from
Caption: records and he's an up-and-coming star
Caption: here's what you might call an SME
Caption: um he knows a lot about our business and
Caption: was involved in the last incarnation of
Caption: this project
Caption: it doesn't sound like Robert's very
Caption: senior though can he make the decisions
Caption: that need to be made oh that's fine
Caption: Robert will have to work with the
Caption: committee on all decisions
Caption: so we have a committee then yeah we've
Caption: got our standard board and they meet
Caption: monthly we can have an urgent decision
Caption: meeting but no more than once a
Caption: fortnight
Caption: right
Caption: um I've got to say I'm a bit concerned
Caption: about this because you know in an agile
Caption: project we need to be able to make
Caption: decisions almost on the spot
Caption: um but anyway
Caption: um you mentioned a previous Incarnation
Caption: what happened with that why didn't it
Caption: succeed well it was a new technology the
Caption: IT team didn't know what they were doing
Caption: it dragged on and took forever so we
Caption: kind of canceled it I also don't think
Caption: the project manager was very good
Caption: poor project manager luckily we have you
Caption: this time
Caption: laughs
Caption: um all right so I'd like to start
Caption: talking to the business if I can because
Caption: this this Project's actually going to
Caption: impact a lot of people so the sooner I
Caption: can start talking to them better so can
Caption: you tell me who I should talk to there's
Caption: no need to talk to the business the IT
Caption: team know exactly what we need this is a
Caption: like for like replacement of our current
Caption: system so we have all the requirements
Caption: laid out
Caption: oh dear this is gonna be good
Caption: I really think we need to talk to the
Caption: business because you know there's going
Caption: to be a huge change impact here
Caption: um do we at least have an internal
Caption: change management team that I can
Caption: leverage we've got a corporate comms
Caption: team and they can manage most of that
Caption: and for anything else I'm sure you can
Caption: handle it anyway I've got a meeting to
Caption: run to nice chat
Caption: thanks trends
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: and P.S Trent would never say any of
Caption: those things he actually he actually
Caption: heads up our design crew so you know
Caption: business engagement user experience all
Caption: those things are pretty important
Caption: so is this project destined to become
Caption: project insanity if it could go wrong it
Caption: will go wrong in this there is so many
Caption: things that are big red flags now In
Caption: fairness it's unlikely that you're going
Caption: to walk into a project which has all of
Caption: them but I'm sure every single one of us
Caption: in this room has experienced many of
Caption: those particular scenarios before
Caption: so the reality is though there's a few
Caption: themes that come out when you actually
Caption: look at it so whilst there was a lot of
Caption: things that we raised there there were
Caption: some key themes that we talked about
Caption: so the first one's actually around
Caption: funding so there's no business case for
Caption: this it's part of the Legacy replacement
Caption: fund
Caption: so what we've got money to actually
Caption: change a system but we've got no money
Caption: for anything else
Caption: nothing else on me I'm the project
Caption: manager I'm funded you know but what
Caption: about the rest of the team there's no
Caption: funding for additional resources we're
Caption: going to need some change management on
Caption: this we're replacing a legacy system
Caption: with something new how can we manage
Caption: without some change management it is
Caption: going to impact the business
Caption: and there's no budget allocated for the
Caption: internal resources either so if you
Caption: think about it we're going to use the
Caption: BAU resources fantastic but they've got
Caption: a day job
Caption: and given that they have a day job
Caption: somebody's still got to do it that job
Caption: doesn't go away so if we want to use
Caption: those people then they're going to need
Caption: to be backfilled so we need some money
Caption: for it
Caption: so but money budget in this particular
Caption: scenario
Caption: the next one's resourcing so resourcing
Caption: generally is a big issue on this one
Caption: we've got a product owner good news
Caption: he doesn't really he's not a product
Caption: owner he's a great guy clearly he knows
Caption: stuff he's only allocated 50 of the time
Caption: but he can't make any decisions
Caption: so how good a product owner is he going
Caption: to be
Caption: the resources don't even know this is
Caption: coming yet
Caption: so yeah we're going to use the IT team
Caption: I've just got to go talk to their
Caption: managers and get them on board that's
Caption: going to be easy yeah right
Caption: and they're only part-time
Caption: when you have resources who are only
Caption: part-time dedicated to a project it's
Caption: always a sign of potential issue and the
Caption: reason I say that is because if they've
Caption: got a BAU responsibility on one side of
Caption: the fence and they've got a project
Caption: responsibility on another side of the
Caption: fence when they are trying when there's
Caption: a fire in BAU land guess what takes
Caption: priority every time they will go back to
Caption: their BAU work and your project will
Caption: suffer
Caption: so the next theme is around decision
Caption: making we've got a committee yay
Caption: once a month we can get a decision that
Caption: they want this to be agile hello this is
Caption: not going to happen right once a month
Caption: board decision and what's worse we all
Caption: know that with committees invariably
Caption: they don't make a decision straight away
Caption: so it might be two months before you can
Caption: even get a decision or three even worse
Caption: and like I said before the product
Caption: owners just not senior enough to make
Caption: decisions he's not a decision maker he's
Caption: not somebody that the organization will
Caption: respect and agree to his decisions there
Caption: needs to be somebody at a very senior
Caption: level who other people will adhere to
Caption: the decisions that they're made
Caption: business engagement
Caption: no need to engage the business it know
Caption: what they want gotta love it how many
Caption: times have you heard that the IT team
Caption: know exactly what the business wants
Caption: how can they
Caption: sure they may know some of the things
Caption: that are wrong with the existing systems
Caption: and they know some of the gripes that
Caption: come out of the business but they don't
Caption: know everybody's job and all the things
Caption: that they do in their day-to-day job
Caption: they don't know the things that drive
Caption: those people insane because of what they
Caption: have to do with the systems they're
Caption: doing they don't know the processes they
Caption: do not know what the requirements are
Caption: no ux gotta love this one
Caption: as Trent actually said recently there's
Caption: no such thing as no ux if you've got
Caption: people involved and a system there is a
Caption: user experience
Caption: if you don't design for it it will be a
Caption: bad experience you need to design for it
Caption: to make sure that it's a good user
Caption: experience
Caption: no change management yay we've got a
Caption: comms team
Caption: so good they can send out some emails
Caption: and they can put something up on their
Caption: internet that's going to be really cool
Caption: but that's not change management change
Caption: management involves bringing people
Caption: along the journey so that when they get
Caption: to the end they Embrace whatever it is
Caption: whatever technology it is that you're
Caption: trying to put in
Caption: like I said corporate comms are not
Caption: change managers
Caption: and they've got a very busy workload
Caption: anyway so they're not going to be able
Caption: to do very much
Caption: and then the final bit
Caption: agile they've got no idea what agile is
Caption: this is going to be an agile project yay
Caption: if you're going to try and run an agile
Caption: project for an organization that's never
Caption: done agile before you're going to spend
Caption: an awful lot of time in coaching and
Caption: training just to bring them along that
Caption: Journey which is going to eat into the
Caption: time for the project
Caption: so in this particular case the
Caption: organization is very immature they don't
Caption: know what they're letting themselves in
Caption: for they don't even know what they've
Caption: asked for
Caption: and out of the box how many times have
Caption: you heard this it's out of the box
Caption: no because customization it's just
Caption: configuration and that's why we don't
Caption: need to talk to the users hello have you
Caption: ever seen a legacy system replaced by
Caption: something off the shelf that's exactly
Caption: the same that follows exactly the same
Caption: processes as the previous one and why
Caption: would you do that anyway because the
Caption: reason for changing is to improve things
Caption: so either you're going to have to do a
Caption: lot of change management around
Caption: processes and organizations and how
Caption: people work or you're going to have to
Caption: customize the heck out of this piece of
Caption: software in order to make it feel like
Caption: the one they had before
Caption: and it's always configuration and how do
Caption: you configure it unless you talk to the
Caption: business
Caption: you don't know what to configure it with
Caption: so lots and lots of red flags in here
Caption: it's no wonder the last one failed if
Caption: they followed the same premise last time
Caption: there it was never going to succeed
Caption: so what can we do about it
Caption: as the project manager on this there are
Caption: a number of things that I can do
Caption: um well when my pictures have all gone
Caption: there we go there are a number of things
Caption: that I can do the first one
Caption: is actually to do
Caption: to Define what success is
Caption: right at the moment success is replace
Caption: XYZ Legacy system with project insanity
Caption: and all will be well
Caption: replacement of a system is not a
Caption: definition of success
Caption: for success to happen it's got to be
Caption: measurable
Caption: so this is the success maybe people are
Caption: now more efficient
Caption: that the organization makes more money
Caption: that we can do more with less
Caption: whatever it is but it has to be
Caption: measurable
Caption: replacing a legacy system with something
Caption: new is not a definition of success and
Caption: in this scenario sure you can go and
Caption: create something new but it won't work
Caption: it won't be successful because the
Caption: people aren't involved because the
Caption: organization doesn't know what they're
Caption: getting into
Caption: next thing project management 101 have a
Caption: plan we all know the old adage plan
Caption: failed to plan and you plan to fail in
Caption: this scenario that is so true the plan
Caption: will need to be really really robust
Caption: and the schedule needs to Encompass
Caption: everything that you know needs to happen
Caption: not just what they think needs to happen
Caption: but what you know needs to happen
Caption: and then once you've done that and this
Caption: is the most critical step
Caption: is to actually run a risk workshop with
Caption: all the key stakeholders
Caption: you need to get them in a room and help
Caption: them to identify all the risks and you
Caption: need to be very very granular so we
Caption: can't have a risk that says resources
Caption: aren't available
Caption: the risk has to be we can't get the
Caption: resources from Finance when we need them
Caption: to be able to do whatever it is or the
Caption: BAU I.T resources get pulled off onto
Caption: BAU activities and off the project all
Caption: of those are different risks and you
Caption: need a different risk for every single
Caption: resource issue and the reason you need a
Caption: different risk is is that you then need
Caption: to get an owner for all of those risks
Caption: so the owner for the one about the
Caption: finance people would be the finance
Caption: manager the owner for the one about the
Caption: IT people would be the it manager
Caption: and then
Caption: more important still they have to take
Caption: some action to make sure that it is
Caption: mitigated so Define the risks identify
Caption: the mitigation and the owner and then
Caption: make it happen
Caption: and then you can come up with a budget
Caption: because we've just doubled the cost of
Caption: this project
Caption: with the schedule that I would have come
Caption: up with in this particular scenario at
Caption: least
Caption: in order to make it work agree the
Caption: budget if you can't get agreement on the
Caption: budget which includes backfilling your
Caption: BAU resources or whatever it is
Caption: great time to walk away
Caption: because it won't succeed it will go over
Caption: budget and then everyone will be
Caption: screaming at you
Caption: and and bear in mind I'm taking this
Caption: from the perspective of a project
Caption: manager but even as a team member on the
Caption: team you can help identify those risks
Caption: and help to work to mitigate those risks
Caption: and to you know take ownership of some
Caption: of those risks so it's not just the
Caption: project manager and the project manager
Caption: cannot own the risks they must be owned
Caption: by someone who could do something about
Caption: it so I've seen project risk schedules
Caption: this big the owner of all of them's the
Caption: project manager still won't work
Caption: and there's a whole load of others which
Caption: I don't really have time to do deal with
Caption: but um you know agree rays of working
Caption: engage the business you got to talk to
Caption: them demonstrate bad ux and get the
Caption: people who who are on site to see it
Caption: so I'll leave you with two things the
Caption: first is is that it projects rarely fail
Caption: because of the technology
Caption: IT projects generally fail because of
Caption: all of the things around it it's the
Caption: people and process and money aspects
Caption: that make it fail so we're talking
Caption: people we're talking the resourcing
Caption: we're talking the business engagement
Caption: money is obvious the funding one and the
Caption: process how decisions are made how
Caption: you're going to work on the project if
Caption: you don't get all of those things right
Caption: that's what will cause the project to
Caption: fail not the lack of the technology to
Caption: do its job because we've got some really
Caption: really clever technical folk out here
Caption: who can make it work and they'll always
Caption: overcome those challenges
Caption: and at the end of the day the
Caption: stakeholders need to acknowledge that
Caption: the is there are risks they need to
Caption: accept ownership for those risks
Caption: and then they need to action those risks
Caption: and if you can get them to do all that
Caption: you've got the best possible chance of
Caption: success in this scenario you still might
Caption: not you still might fail but it'll give
Caption: you the best possible chance of success
Caption: thank you
Caption: [Applause]
Caption: [Music]
Caption: thank you so much for that amazing talk
Caption: I know that I've definitely learned a
Caption: few things I'll be on the lookout in the
Caption: next project that I'm joining in
Caption: hopefully not quite as many red flags